Thank you everyone for joining me here
today. Hopefully you've gotten an
opportunity to see some of the emergent
vessels out in front. Um so today I'll
be talking about as Hannah said emergent
vessels transfiguring material reality
towards self assembling living
sculptures.
So I've spent the last year studying
this one question. How does order emerge
from chaos across all scales and
domains? The second law of
thermodynamics states that entropy
disorder always increases in the
universe as a whole. Yet so much of
life's in the universe's most complex,
rich and beautiful phenomena are
actually instantiations of local order
that emerge within this greater chaos
sphere.
A tree, a fungus, a human brain. Each is
a temporary pocket of an intricate
structure.
Life creates local order as a way of
contributing to this global entropy
increase.
Eliga Priyugene won the Nobel Prize in
chemistry in 1977 for his work on the
theory of dissipative structures in
which he explored how in nonlinear
complex systems such as life they
receive energy and matter from external
sources and then use that to
self-organize into more complex
structures over time. So in in essence
this local order emerges as a way to
then ultimately increase global entropy
thus still following the law of second
the second law of thermodynamics.
The origin of life can be understood
through this lens. Life began as the
universe experimenting with form
molecules learning to self assemble
under the pressure of energy flow. From
this came cells. From cells came
organisms and from organisms came us.
One of the most complex instantiations
of order.
Yet as this instantiation of order, we
are still existing against this backdrop
of expanding entropy.
My sculptural works are microcosms of
dissipative structures. These vessels
exist because energy flows through them.
And it's this flow that drives living
material to self assemble into vascular
forms. as chaos orders itself into the
most efficient pattern to sustain life
while dissipating the very energy
required to do so outward. In other
words, as an artist scientist, I am not
imposing order but rather activating the
conditions where order emerges as an
energetic necessity.
And in using this initial biological
dynamical system, we can then understand
how order emerges from chaos in other
contexts as well. Whether that be other
biological systems or non-biological
systems such as cities, language,
social, social structures.
Emergence is when the whole becomes more
than the sum of its parts. When
countless local interactions give rise
to a new global pattern like
consciousness from neurons or life
itself from molecules.
Again, much of the universe's complex
phenomena exhibit emergent behavior. And
the bioprinted vascular networks I'm
creating are themselves emergent. These
local interactions of cells, growth
signals, hydrogels self-organized into
higher order branching architectures.
Here in the background is an image of a
bird memoration which is another
instantiation of emergence in which
every single bird is only focusing on
the the position of the bird next to it.
Yet when taken as a whole, the pattern
that emerges is something much more
beautiful and intricate than its local
interactions.
So to then understand this complex
phenomenon of dissipative structures or
life, I go about this by deconstructing
life's most complex phenomenon which is
life itself.
To do this, I first build from the
ground up by distill distilling down a
complex emergent form life to its most
basic unit. We can ask ourselves, what
is the basic unit of aliveness?
Is it a feeling? Is it a cell? Is it
something that doesn't have words?
Within a biological system, we can start
off with a cell.
It's with this these cells that I'm then
combined them with a gel and media to
become inks. Inks where I can write with
this basic unit of of aliveness of a
cell.
Then what does this mean? What does it
mean if we're able to write with life
itself? What happens when life becomes a
medium itself?
My inquiries lie in witnessing what
emerges in this rearrangement of media
and seeing what comes within
to actually write with these bio inks.
Uh one has to mix cells into these three
components. There's the actual gel which
is typically carbopole which is a hair
gel or it can be algaenate particles
which form this may mayonnaise like
slurry of beads. Then one combines the
cells themselves or whatever living
matter you want to use. It can be human
cells. It can be fungi, spores,
bacteria, any living matter type. And
then one uses media whether that's
salts, sugars, anything to keep the
cells alive. Then this becomes
synthesized into a bio ink. And here you
can see this background image of a bio
printer printing with this bio ink. In a
bio-engineering context, we can work
towards organ engineering by building up
these organs with induced pur potent
stem cells that compos of this ink to
make organs that self assemble from
scratch.
Um here we can play a video
from lab
that can show this clump of IPSC stem
stem cells that are encapsulated in this
in this tube where
um vascule is being printed and then
media is being flown through the vessel
networks to then create this emergent
form of an organ.
And here you can see uh this is a
machine that's also used in the context
of organ engineering of a new heart
where it's being pumped to have this
emergent vessel mechanically learn how
to beat like a heart.
So now in terms of printing the actual
bio ink, what you see in the front in
the gallery is a printest which is uh
the name of this open- source 3D bio
printer developed in my lab at Stanford
at the Skyler Scott lab where they're
printing vascular networks with these
bio inks real time. And after this talk
you can go see and see the pro progress
of the print and see emergence happen in
real time. This open source 3D bio
printer is made out of 3D printed parts
and also labgrade syringes, stepper
motors and open source electronics. It
makes it easy and cheap, modular and
very accessible.
Now to write with living matter we can
also think about what kinds of hybrid
ink species we can create in an organ
engineering context one can use induced
pur potent stem cells and I've been
working also with this fungus called
neurospera intermedia which is this
bright orange fungus that m that's
patterning mim mimics the patterning of
neurons. So you can see here in the top
right, this is an image of neurospera
and you can see it's starting to branch
out and create this emergent pattern
that mimics how neurons pattern. And on
the bottom is this photo of experiments
I've done with a combination of the
neurospera with the bio ink and
different color and media to see if it
stays alive in the bio ink synthesis
process, which it does. If you can see
the small little bright orange fuzzy
parts that u denote the spores of this
fungus.
And so with this combination, one can
start to imagine what kinds of living
hybrid species can be created. What
happens when we combine fungi with stem
cells, bacteria,
or completely engineered proteins that
compose of this bio ink that we're
printing with.
Here are some examples of biorinted
structures that we've created. Um, a lab
member was able to create this algorithm
that can vascularize any 3D object that
it's given. So, here you can see this is
a left atrium of a heart that's been
vascularized and then biorinted using
the exact system that I've explained.
It's also the same form that you'll see
in the sculptures up front. This is a
500 vessel network um that is pretty
complex and dense, but one can also
continue to run the algorithm to
continuously vascularize vascularize and
increase the complexity complexity of
the structure.
And here are some computer
visualizations of the same
vascularization pattern. Again,
vascularization is this
emergent phenomenon in which the um
the energy is trying to maximize surface
area while also increasing its energy
resources. So here you can see the same
branching patterns that occur in blood
vessels occur in trees and the fungi
that I was using as well as other
patterns in nature.
So in this manner the universe's entropy
and order are unfolding in real time.
The sculpture becomes a very complex
system itself. The scientific experiment
is happening in real time with these
living inks.
These biorinted self assembling living
sculptures serve as a microcosm to
explore how life becomes complex and
emergent. How order emerges from chaos.
Sculpture becomes system. Experiment is
sculpture.
And in understanding and witnessing how
life emerges through this biological
sculpture system, we can then abstract
these behavioral patterns of the system
and apply them to other complex systems,
organizations, cities, weather patterns,
language, culture.
I'm also interested in
at the molecular level embodying
information into these self assembling
living matter.
In using in synthesizing these bio inks,
one can also start to draw from other
mediums that capture phenomena, for
example, language or poetry. I worked on
a project last year where I was encoding
Rula's do allergies into protein code.
What this looks like is taking this 2D
dimensional two-dimensional form of
qualia exchange of language or poetry
and then mapping them to the 20 amino
acids that make up proteins.
Then using alphafold one can turn this
2D
vector of information into a
three-dimensional shape. And this
process of protein folding is once again
the universe and the thermodynamics of
the universe governing how local order
binds itself amongst global entropy.
The sequence folds into a
threedimensional shape not because I
designed the shape but because the laws
of thermodynamics drive it toward a
local minimum of energy.
In that folding information has cross
between mediums. A poem becomes a
protein. symbolic meaning becomes
molecular geometry. And here you can see
actually the shape of the proteins.
It's interesting to also question what
gets lost or exchanged in different
languages. I was able to encode the
information in both German in Rulka's
original language uh written language as
well as in English. and seeing what gets
lost or generated in that
transfiguration
um is another question that I'd like to
explore.
And to take it even further, once syn
once synthesizing that protein from 2D
to 3D, one can synthesize it in the
physical realm and then embed it into
the living bio ink by engineering that
protein into the cells of the bio ink
that then get synthesized with the gels
and the media.
It creates a physical
structure and what emerges isn't
predictable. It's a new form shaped
simultaneously by language, biology, by
entropy itself.
This is where my practice lies in
creating the conditions for emergence
and then witnessing what appears when
energy, matter and information find each
other.
What emerges when embodied information
is expressed via living bio inks? What
other kinds of information
can be transcribed and then transfigured
between mediums? This is a question I
would like to ask all of you.
Understanding the shared logic of the
universe, we can use thermodynamic terms
of order, entropy, dissipative
structures. And this mode of
epistemology is a way of bearing witness
to the profound beauty and
interconnectedness of existence. A
medium through which we can uncover the
shared logic that animates our
universe's most intricate phenomena.
Yet underneath all of this, there is a
pulsating
sense, an unsayable it that underlies
all phenomena.
One can call it God, one can call it
entropy, one can call it life itself.
Perhaps there isn't any word for this
yet.
However, through these sculpture
systems, hopefully I can get closer to
finding a word.
I'd like to thank many colleagues and
collaborators for helping with this huge
undertaking of trying to understand life
itself. Um, especially all the different
labs that I work between and mentors and
friends and family. especially my mom
who's here right now.
And
um like to open up for questions
and thank you for listening.